[THEME MUSIC]
>> "Thinking Allowed,"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
And this is part two
of our two-part program
on the religious significance
of entheogenic plants
and chemicals.
My guest is Professor
Emeritus Huston Smith,
author of "The World's
Religions," "Forgotten Truth,"
"Beyond the Postmodern Mind,"
and "Cleansing the Doors
of Perception.
Professor Smith has taught at
MIT, Syracuse, and Berkeley.
Welcome back, Huston.
>> Thank you.
>> We've been talking
about entheogens,
a special term meaning
god disclosing.
And it's a term referring to
the same sorts of chemicals
and substances that have
sometimes been called
psychedelic or hallucinogenic.
And I think it's hard
to have a discussion
about these chemicals and
their religious significance
without also looking at the
enormous popular movement
during the 1960s and 1970s that
the use of these substances
engendered.
>> That's very true of a very
murky and complex social scene.
And that does make
it very difficult
to try to look at
the constructive,
the positive experience that
these substances can introduce.
You're quite right.
It's very hard to separate.
Aldous Huxley called
one of his books
on this subject "The
Heaven and Hell" drugs.
And that's quite right.
And Albert Hoffman,
who discovered LSD,
wrote his account in a book
that he titled "LSD, My Problem
Child," a very good title.
Because separating the good
from-- the wheat from the chaff
is extremely difficult.
>> Well, if I may, Huston,
inject a personal note here,
I should just say about
myself, I was a college student
in the 1960s.
I started out as a
business major, actually.
>> Hard for me to imagine.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Go ahead.
>> Well, I still have
business interests today.
But I was exposed
to these entheogens
and ingested them on numerous
occasions in my youth.
And my experiences, I
want to say looking back,
were virtually all positive,
were virtually all benign.
And today, my interest
in human potential,
and parapsychology,
and mysticism,
metaphysics and spirituality--
it's a very serious pursuit
for me, as I'm sure all--
>> I know.
>> --my listeners know.
And I have to say that those
experiences in my youth
were very important in
sort of blowing away
what I would call the
crust of 1950s middle class
mentality, in
which I was raised.
>> Thank you for
saying that, Jeffrey.
I think in the atmosphere today,
it took some courage for you
to do that.
[LAUGHS]
>> Well, it's the truth.
>> It's the truth.
That's it.
>> The experience pointed me in
the direction that I'm in now.
And, of course, it's
been a long, long time
since I've had any exposure
to those substances.
But I have no regrets.
>> I am right with you on that.
And, Jeffrey, as we think about
it, how many millions of people
there may be or probably
are out there who
would say essentially the same.
I'll just give my most
immediate example.
I happen to have been
invited in New York City just
this last Monday--
people-- I could not
believe the wealth.
They had a penthouse on
top of a 40-story window.
But they were interested
in my work, invited me,
and both of them said
essentially the same thing.
The woman in the
couple said that her
experience lying on a carpet
listening to Beethoven's violin
concerto--
it ended her fear of death.
And the man said something
like that in his own case.
So there must be
millions out there.
And one of the points
in my writing this book
is to try to open up the
discussion, rather than just
sweeping truth under a
carpet and knuckling down
under before the hysteria
that surrounds this subject.
>> Well, the early writers on
this subject are the people
like Aldous Huxley, Alan
Watts, Jean Houston and Robert
Masters.
>> And let's not
forget William James.
>> William James.
They associated the
use of these entheogens
with the great
metaphysical search
for authentic self-awareness.
>> Absolutely.
>> Timothy Leary, Ralph Metzner,
and Richard Alpert wrote
in 1968, I believe, "The
Psychedelic Experience,"
in which they equated the
experience of ingesting
entheogens, LSD at the
time, with the experience
of traveling through
the Bardo Plains,
as described in the
"Tibetan Book of the Dead,"
a profoundly
spiritual experience.
>> Yeah.
>> I took those writings
very seriously in my youth,
and I still do.
>> I do, also.
But then, it got mixed up with
the rebellion of the time.
>> Yes.
>> This was the time
of the Vietnam War.
And so rebellion and resistance
got mixed into the picture.
And this alarmed parents.
I have to say, with all
my personal fondness
for Timothy Leary, that if I
had been a parent there then
and I heard the siren
song to my children
that the establishment, there
was nothing good about it,
and the only way to
react was to drop out,
just cut out from society--
I, as a parent, would have
been alarmed by that, too.
And so that is
understandable, also.
But it has created
a chaotic mindset
towards these
substances but you and I
are trying to shed a few slivers
of sanity in understanding.
>> Well, you were a parent
at the time, as I recall.
I remember meeting
your daughter.
And I also know you've written
an essay, very critical,
about the Timothy Leary's motto,
tune in, turn on, and drop out.
But, on the other
hand, you pointed out
that it's not so different from
what the early Christian church
fathers were saying.
>> That is true.
There is a parallel.
The other part of that essay
now in my book is that they--
so far, the parallel is
very strong, very exact.
But the early church fathers
had a positive program.
And I think that's what
the psychedelic movement--
it was negative and right
in much of its rebellion.
But it didn't have a positive
vision to substitute.
>> And we can look back
now, several decades later,
and say while there's some
jewels in there that we
don't want to lose, the
psychedelic movement has not
had the kind of lasting impact
on culture that people thought
it might have had.
And, certainly, nothing to
compare with the world's
great religions.
>> That's right.
>> Yet, as a scientist,
as a philosopher,
we come back to the issue of
empirical metaphysics that you
raise.
One scholar compared
the psychedelic--
which is the term
they used then.
You call it entheogens, to be
incomparable to a telescope
or a microscope, only
pointed to the inner recesses
of the human soul.
>> Yes.
That's true.
And some have, for that reason,
called these substances mind
expanding.
And I think that's not quite
a careful use of words.
Because it's more like, I
think-- did you use the word
a microscope?
>> Yeah.
>> Does a microscope
expand our awareness?
Well, certainly with
regard to the cell, yes.
It expands our ability
to see the cell,
but by shutting out
everything else.
And so it's a
little bit careless
to say mind expanding without
introducing that qualification.
>> Huston, we'll
take a break now.
>> All right.
>> We'll be back.
[THEME MUSIC]
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
My guest is Professor
Emeritus Huston Smith,
author of "Cleansing the Doors
of Perception" and "The World's
Religions."
We're talking about the
religious significance
of entheogenic chemicals and
plants, chemicals and plants
that help us to be
disclosed or to be
present to the
nature of the divine.
Huston, I think we're getting
down to a very crucial point.
And that is the
distinction between living
an authentic, mystical,
spiritual life, and especially
in community, as
opposed to having
an authentic,
spiritual experience.
>> I'm glad you brought
that up, Jeffrey,
because that is
crucial, I think.
I have come to the
conclusion, and I
did early on, within
a year or two,
and actually conducted
some experiment
that descriptively a
mystical experience triggered
by these substances are
indistinguishable from those
that occur to the great
mystics spontaneously.
I actually did a study,
and I took samples
from the mystical
tradition and from
the entheogenic experiences.
I shuffled them.
And I asked people who
were knowledgeable scholars
of the mystical whether
they could separate them
into their original power.
They could not do that.
But that brings exactly
the point that you say.
So the experiences
are indistinguishable.
That's not the point.
Experiences come and go.
The main point is
the religious life,
which centers on the way in
which experiences can be worked
into the substance
of one's being
so that they alter in more
benevolent, kindly ways
the light that follow.
So the formula I have--
well, it's not mine.
I think it came--
I think Ram Dass used it first.
He said, when you get
the message, hang up--
a way of saying that it's
not the experiences that
are important.
And another phrase
that I like very much--
it's not altered states,
but altered traits.
That's where the
true point lies,
and that these can induce
wonderful cloud 9 experiences
is all very pleasant.
But unless, as I say, you
can bring it back through--
and this requires
prolonged practice--
and modulate, you
might say, your life up
to what it would be if it
were lived in accord with what
one experiences mystically--
unless that happened, why,
then it's of no consequence.
>> There's a zen phrase I've
heard that makes me think it
might be applicable here, called
the stink of enlightenment.
>> [LAUGHS] Right.
Those who magnify it,
wear on their sleeve
their glorious Satori
experiences, but sit around
while others wash up the dishes.
The zen phrase, stinking of zen,
applies to that carelessness
and overlooking where
the real business lies.
>> So one might say that you
could characterize that fervor
of the '60s and early '70s
as stinking, in that sense.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Yes.
All right.
The zen people are very earthy.
But I like the directness and
pointedness of their statement.
Yeah.
>> Well, one would hope
that since we're having this
conversation, that there's
something worth salvaging
in all of that.
And perhaps the potential
exists in the next century
or two or centuries, that
a more mature lifestyle
can be built in
Earth culture here,
that can include
the valuable aspects
of the entheogenic
experience, and also
include the whole life
supporting and community
building process, which
is really required.
>> Fervently to be hoped, yes.
I think this is
a difficult task.
The variables are
daunting in their number.
And yet, I come back to
Aldous Huxley's statement
that without question
note the emphasis
that entheogenic experience is
the most important experience
a human being can have short
of the mystical vision.
And I think that
society that precludes
that most important, short
of the mystic beatific vision
experience from its
citizens by its laws.
You cannot have that experience
without danger of going
to jail.
I think something is
deeply, deeply wrong
in a society set up that way.
And that is not to blink
or shortchange the danger.
The dangers are there.
But, certainly, one
should hope that we
would have the wit and the
will to work on this problem
and work out some
sensible solution.
>> Now, Aldous Huxley,
whom you mentioned,
is an interesting case in
point, a great novelist.
I was first introduced
to his works
through his novel "Brave
New World," sort of--
>> Absolutely.
>> --a negative utopia.
>> Yeah.
>> And then something
transformed him from a cynic,
which I think that book
was basically cynical and--
>> It was.
>> --deeply disturbing to a
great metaphysical writer.
>> The perennial philosophy
has stood the test in time
wonderfully and introduced
millions of young people
to the authenticity of
the mystical vision,
and more important, the
mystical way of life.
Yes.
I mean, a wonderful
servant of society.
>> And Huxley, himself, I gather
was transformed in part by his
experience with the entheogens.
>> Well he certainly spoke
of it with the utmost regard.
>> And, as I recall, your
description of his life--
he used that experience
as a springboard for--
along with his
friend, Gerald Hurd,
who was a big
inspiration to you.
They used that
entheogenic experience
as a springboard for a life of
discipline, a life of inquiry,
for not a wasteful life
but a focused life.
>> Absolutely.
At one point when I was
in touch with them, they--
Gerald Hurd, taking
the initiative,
had established a
kind of monastery
in Trabuco Canyon, where
they were meditating four
hours a day, day after day.
So talk about folding discipline
in with these substances--
they set the example.
>> And, earlier, you referred
to Ram Dass, who said,
once you've gotten the
message, hang up the phone.
[LAUGHTER]
And he's an exemplar of a
person who has devoted himself
to a life of service.
>> Absolutely one of the
great models for our time,
giving away his
fortune to the poor,
active in so many foundations,
dedicated to human welfare.
He's an inspiration.
>> So it suggests that out of
that era were people who really
got the message and did
integrate it into their life.
Perhaps a whole
operation didn't.
But--
>> Peter Coyote is another one.
I mean, different but--
I don't know if you know, but--
>> He's an actor and a
social activist, I think.
>> And heads the California
Council on the Arts.
But his name Coyote, came
from when he was in college.
He heard about these things.
He and his friend knew nothing
as to what to do with them.
But he spent one night
under the influence
just running through
the cornfields of Iowa,
near Grinnell College.
And he felt himself
bonded with the coyote,
to the point that
he changed his name.
>> Well, so it does suggest that
if we look carefully at that
generation that came
out of the 1960s--
and I guess I include you as
a forerunner in that regard--
that we will find many positive,
lifelong examples of how
careers were built out
of that inspiration that
came from the
entheogenic experience.
>> I think there are
millions out there.
It's our climate
of hysteria that
keeps people keeping
this to themselves
and not coming forward.
But the fact is there.
>> Huston Smith, thank you
so much for coming forward,
yourself.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> As always, it's a
joy to be with you.
>> It's all mutual,
Jeffrey, as you well know.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[THEME MUSIC]